## The Economic Consequences of Saddam Hussein: A Synthetic Control Approach

The 1970s marked the beginning of a period of unprecedented economic growth and high living standards in Iraq. During this time, Iraq was one of the most prosperous and advanced countries in the Arab world with the second largest economy among Arab nations and third largest economy in the Middle East.  Nationalization of the oil industry in 1972 and increase in oil prices were the main drivers of this growth and prosperity. The government used the majority of oil revenues to provide free healthcare and education; expand infrastructure; organize large construction projects; and invest in industry and the military.  Development; however, was short-lived as Iraq would soon entangle itself in two devastating wars. 

This period of unprecedented growth also coincided with future president, Saddam Hussein, quickly rising through the ranks of the Ba’ath political party and the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), the top decision-making body of the country. As the deputy of chairman of the RCC, Hussein headed the economic planning council that helped modernize Iraq’s economy, health, education, and infrastructure. In 1979, Hussein staged a palace coup and seized power from then president Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr. While Hussein may be considered to be one of the driving forces behind Iraq’s modernization, he is also the culprit behind the destruction of the country’s growth and development.

One can only wonder that if modernization had continued to be a top priority in the country, what would Iraq look like today if Saddam Hussein had not taken power in 1979? Since Iraq has had a history, although brief, of demonstrating the capability of using its oil wealth productively, it may be reasonable to claim that if not for the catastrophic decisions of Saddam Hussein, Iraq today would be a thriving modern country, much like neighboring Saudi Arabia or the United Arab Emirates. This work intends to test this claim by employing the synthtetic control method. This technique allows for the evaluation of a treatment, in this case Hussein becoming president, by creating a counterfactual. The counterfactual will demonstrate whether or not economic growth in Iraq would have fared better had it not been for his presidency. This work focuses on the trajectory of GDP per capita as a measure for economic growth.


